# Bug Bounty Preparation Checklist


## About
This document outlines tasks you should perform prior to, and during the launch of a bug bounty program. The key themes are:
* Stakeholder identification and support
* Bounty scope
* Financial considerations
* Processes and materials necessary prior to launching a program
* Expanding your bounty program

<b>Note:</b> Bug bounty programs should NOT be the starting point for security testing at your company. You should first utilize security scanning and <a href="https://www.sectemplates.com/2024/06/announce-the-external-penetration-testing-program-pack-10.html">penetration testing</a> before launching a <a href="https://www.sectemplates.com/2024/07/announcing-the-bug-bounty-program-pack-10.html">bug bounty program</a>.

## Checklist
- [ ] <b>Identify Key Stakeholders:</b> It's critical to identify the minimum set of key stakeholders within security, engineering, product, and operations, and to notify them of your intention to run a bug bounty program. These interactions should clearly discuss your timing/rollout plan and the role their organizations may play. Collaboration is critical to alleviate concerns around increased workloads, urgent requests, and benefits for the applications/features/domains within the scope of a bug bounty program. This step should not be rushed.
- [ ] <b>Determine an Initial Scope:</b> To identify an initial application/domain/feature that is a good candidate for a bounty program, start with an engineering team that is security-minded or has a good relationship with the security team. They are likely to best understand the vision and importance of the program, recognize the risks their feature may pose, and can be promoted/evangelized by security as piloting and co-developing this program for a wider company rollout. Promoting their involvement benefits their team and highlights its impact on the company as a whole. Ideally, you want to start with a high-impact asset/feature/application that can demonstrate program value early.
- [ ] <b>Determine Vulnerability Scope:</b> Determining what vulnerability classes to pay for is critical and clearly communicates what you will and won't pay bounties for. It's important to determine what types of vulnerabilities should be paid out. You can utilize checklists such as the <a href="https://www.sans.org/top25-software-errors/">SANS 25</a>, <a href="http://projects.webappsec.org/Threat-Classification">WASC Threat Classification</a>, and <a href="https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/">OWASP Top Ten</a> as a starting point. 
- [ ] <b>Identify Bug Bounty Vendors:</b> You have a choice between running all aspects of a bug bounty program internally or leveraging a bug bounty service provider. We recommend not handling everything yourself due to complications with paying researchers, verifying they are not from sanctioned countries, and the associated tax issues. Bounty providers also have strict rules ensuring that security researchers "play nice." If a researcher acts with ill intent, they may find themselves banned from all bug bounty programs offered by that provider, eliminating substantial income. Therefore, it's advantageous to leverage a bug bounty provider to host your program. Once you have determined your scope and goals, reach out to several vendors to determine which one aligns best with your company and bounty plans.
- [ ] <b>Determine Vulnerability Payout Amounts:</b> Vulnerability researchers want to be paid for the time and effort they put into a program. In the early stages of a bounty program, vulnerabilities are easier to find, and thus lower payouts are standard. Over time, as issues become harder to find, the bounty amount should increase. Work closely with your bug bounty provider for recommended payout levels and forecasted payout amounts for the year, and verify these align with your budget. A caveat with lower bounty amounts is that more senior researchers may not consider your program until it becomes 'financially interesting' to them.
- [ ] <b>Verify Initial Scope with Supporting Engineering, Product, and Ops Stakeholders: </b> As mentioned earlier, it's ideal to find an engineering team you work well with and who generally understands the importance of security. Collaborate with engineering subject matter experts to discuss what a workflow would look like and to simplify the process for them and other impacted stakeholders. Having this buy-in and a pilot team helps not only gain support but also demonstrates consideration for engineering's time and priorities.
- [ ] <b>Develop Process for Ingesting Vulnerability Reports:</b> You will need to determine if an email address, web form, or other mechanism will be used by researchers to submit their findings. You will also need to establish a workflow for the security team to review, manage, and respond to the security researchers.
  * <b>Email Approach:</b> You will need to determine an alias you don't mind being public and may receive a lot of spam messages. You should also provide a PGP key to optionally allow researchers to encrypt their messages to you.
  * <b>Web Form Approach:</b> You will need to decide if you are hosting the form yourself or utilizing a bug bounty provider for this purpose. A bug bounty provider incurs an additional cost but benefits include the provider triaging, responding to, and aiding with researcher challenges.
- [ ] <b>Develop Internal Process for Tracking Vulnerabilities:</b> Prior to launching a bug bounty program, you should have an approach for filing vulnerabilities with the right stakeholders (typically in Jira), tracking progress, and assisting them in a timely manner. Failure to establish this process will result in mismanaging the findings, a bad researcher experience, and possibly negative legal or publicity outcomes. This should be considered a hard requirement prior to launch.    
- [ ] <b>Understand How to Plug Into the Incident Response Process:</b> A bug bounty program may receive a vulnerability report that could result in a <a href="https://www.sectemplates.com/2024/06/announcing-the-incident-response-program-pack-10.html">security incident</a>. It's critical to understand how the internal incident response process works and when to engage the right stakeholders.
- [ ] <b>Select Bug Bounty Provider:</b> After reviewing your provider options against your requirements and goals, you will need to establish a contract with the provider. Verify that everything fits within the parameters of your budget, timing, and desired workflows. At this stage, you should begin onboarding the vendor, as this may take several months depending on the speed of your third-party review/contracts process.
- [ ] <b>Create, or Update Your External Security Page:</b> If you don't have one already, create a security-focused page on your company's website with instructions on how to reach out to the security team. When you are ready to announce your program publicly, update this page to instruct security researchers on how to contact you through your bounty program.
- [ ] <b>Test the Process:</b> After identifying the pilot team, ticketing, and associated vulnerability management processes, you should submit both a bogus issue and a real issue through the process. This will enable you to verify if security is correctly identifying bogus items and ensuring that real issues are routed to the correct engineering owner.   
- [ ] <b>Create and Publish a Bug Bounty Policy:</b> A bug bounty policy provides researchers with the ground rules for your program and can be quite extensive.  <a href="./Bug_bounty_simplified_policy.md">A sample bug bounty policy</a> can be found in this release pack. <br>
- [ ] <b>Start with a Private Bug Bounty:</b> Prior to making a public bug bounty, it is STRONGLY suggested to first start with a private bug bounty, or invite-only bug bounty. This involves inviting a handful of security researchers to the bug bounty program as the first cohort of researchers, with a very limited scope aligned with engineering teams within the pilot group.
  * This will require identifying the initial group of people you want to participate in your program. If there are responsible researchers who have submitted issues to you in the past, this is typically the first group of individuals you want to invite as a reward for collaborating with you. If you lack such individuals, the bug bounty service vendor can typically provide guidance on how to find these people within their platform and how to invite them.
  * It's recommended to start with approximately 10 researchers in the initial cohort.    
- [ ] <b>Verify the Process is Working:</b> It's recommended to pilot the invite-only bug bounty long enough to get several submissions that have been thoroughly reviewed by security and remediated or disputed by engineering.
  * This will help you create templates for common response types such as valid, invalid, duplicate, or needs more info. <a href="./Bug_bounty_sample_responses.md">Sample responses are available</A> in this release pack. 
  * This will allow you to verify the intake forms are working correctly, and that the triage process is functioning as expected.
  * This allows you to verify that internal vulnerability handling and ticketing processes are working as expected.
- [ ] <b>Expand Program Scope in Phases:</b> At this stage, you should develop a rollout plan for expanding your bug bounty program. It's best to list the domains, applications, or features you want to include and to coordinate with each internal team on the logistics of receiving and remediating submissions.
  * A common approach is to start with fewer than 5 assets in scope and slowly expand the researcher count before expanding the number of assets. The benefits of expanding the researcher pool before the asset pool are that different engineering teams are involved, each with different maturity and response times. Varying response times may result in a bad researcher experience or a negative perception of your bounty program.
  * Bug bounty providers/vendors may charge extra for assets, so it's important to sync with them on the pros and costs of each model from the finance side as well.
- [ ] <b>Continuously Monitor Budget Impact Against Forcast:</b> You may see a huge influx of issues you weren't expecting, which could quickly drain your payout pool. This is why launching a private bounty first is essential to understand the volume and payouts for initial low-hanging fruit. You don't want to launch a program, run out of money, and be unable to pay researchers who have played by your rules. This will result in very negative backlash from the security research community, including negative press and potential consequences from your bug bounty provider.
- [ ] <b>Launch Public Bounty: </b> At this stage, you have rolled out a private bounty, expanded it, tested your processes, verified your budget, and ensured you are resourced correctly to handle the workload. Work with your bug bounty provider to best understand how to enable and promote your public bounty program. The launch of your program may gain media attention, so it's best to coordinate with your public relations and legal teams prior to launching to ensure there's no conflict during a possible company-wide information embargo.
<br><br>
Document version 1.1 copied from [Sectemplates.com](https://www.sectemplates.com)

